modules/howtos/pages/transcoders-nonjson.adoc, before:

= Transcoders and Non-JSON Documents
:description: The .NET SDK supports common JSON document requirements out-of-the-box.
:page-topic-type: howtos

[abstract]
{description}
Custom transcoders and serializers provide support for applications needing to perform advanced operations, including supporting non-JSON data.

The .NET SDK uses the concepts of transcoders and serializers, which are used whenever data is sent to or retrieved from Couchbase Server.

When sending data to Couchbase, the SDK passes the Object being sent to a transcoder.
The transcoder can either reject the Object as being unsupported, or convert it into a `byte[]` and a Common Flag.
The Common Flag specifies whether the data is JSON, a non-JSON string, or raw binary data.
It may, but does not have to, use a serializer to perform the byte conversion.

On retrieving data from Couchbase, the fetched `byte[]` and Common Flag are passed to a transcoder.
The transcoder converts the bytes into a concrete class (the application specifies the required type) if possible.
It may use a serializer for this.

NOTE: Many applications will not need to be aware of transcoders and serializers, as the defaults support most standard JSON use cases.
The information in this page is only needed if the application has an advanced use-case, likely involving either non-JSON data, or a requirement for a particular JSON serialization library.

== Default Behaviour
The `ClusterOptions` contains a global transcoder and serializer, which by default are  `JsonTranscoder` and `DefaultSerializer`.

`DefaultSerializer` uses the high-performance JSON library https://github.com/JamesNK/Newtonsoft.Json[JSON.NET] for serializing and deserializing byte arrays to and from concrete objects.

On sending data to Couchbase, `JsonTranscoder` will send Objects to its serializer (`DefaultSerializer` by default) to convert into a `byte[]`.
The serialized bytes are then sent to the Couchbase Server, along with a Common Flag of JSON.

`JsonTranscoder` will pass any Object to its serializer, apart from a `byte[]`.
It will reject this with an InvalidArgumentException, as it is ambiguous how it should be handled.

On retrieving data from Couchbase, `JsonTranscoder` passes the fetched `byte[]` and Common Flag to its serializer (`DefaultSerializer` by default) to convert into a concrete class.

This table summarizes that information, and this more concise form will be used to describe the other transcoders included in the SDK.

[cols="3", options="header"]
|===
|Item
|Result
|Common Flag

|String
|Results of serializer
|JSON

|byte[]
|InvalidArgumentException
|-

|Other `Object`
|Results of serializer
|JSON
|===

== RawJsonTranscoder
The RawJsonTranscoder provides the ability for the application to explicitly specify that the data they are storing or retrieving is JSON.
This transcoder does not accept a serializer, and always performs straight pass through of the data to the server.
This enables the application to avoid unnecessary parsing costs when they are certain they are using JSON data.

It only accepts Strings and `byte[]`.

[cols="3", options="header"]
|===
|Item
|Result
|Common Flag

|String
|Passthrough
|JSON

|byte[]
|Passthrough
|JSON

|Other `Object`
|InvalidArgumentException
|-
|===

This transcoder is particularly useful when working with third-party JSON libraries.
Here we want to use https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.text.json?view=netcore-3.1[System.Text.Json] for serialization, instead of the default JSON.NET:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=raw-json-encode,indent=0]
----

Since Gson has already done the serialization work, we don't want to use the default `JsonTranscoder`, as this will run the provided String needlessly through `DefaultSerializer` (Jackson).
Instead, RawJsonTranscoder is used, which just passes through the serialized bytes, and stores them in Couchbase with the JSON Common Flag set.

Similarly, the same transcoder is used on reading the document, so the raw bytes can be retrieved in a String without going through `DefaultSerializer` (Jackson).
Gson can then be used for the deserialization.

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=raw-json-decode,indent=0]
----

== Non-JSON Transcoders
It is most common to store JSON with Couchbase.
However, it is possible to store non-JSON documents, such as raw binary data, perhaps using an concise binary encoding like https://msgpack.org[MessagePack] or https://cbor.io/[CBOR], in the Key-Value store.

NOTE: It's important to note that the Couchbase Data Platform includes multiple components other than the Key-Value store -- including Query and its indexes, FTS, Analytics, and Eventing -- and these are optimized for JSON and will either ignore or provide limited functionality with non-JSON documents.

Also note that some simple data types can be stored directly as JSON, without recourse to non-JSON transcoding.
A valid JSON document can be a simple integer (`42`), string (`"hello"`), array (`[1,2,3]`), boolean (`true`, `false`) and the JSON `null` value.

=== RawStringTranscoder
The RawStringTranscoder provides the ability for the user to explicitly store and retrieve raw string data with Couchbase.
It can be used to avoid the overhead of storing the string as JSON, which requires two bytes for double quotes, plus potentially more for escaping characters.

Note that this transcoder does not accept a serializer, and always performs straight passthrough of the data to the server.  It only accepts Strings.

[cols="3", options="header"]
|===
|Item
|Result
|Common Flag

|String
|Passthrough
|String

|byte[]
|InvalidArgumentException
|-

|Other `Object`
|InvalidArgumentException
|-
|===

Here’s an example of using the `RawStringTranscoder`:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=string,indent=0]
----

=== RawBinaryTranscoder
The RawBinaryTranscoder provides the ability for the user to explicitly store and retrieve raw byte data to Couchbase.
The transcoder does not perform any form of real transcoding, and does not take a serializer, but rather passes the data through and assigns the appropriate `Binary` Common Flag (except in the case of an exception).

[cols="3", options="header"]
|===
|Item
|Encoding Result
|Decoding Result

|String
|InvalidArgumentException
|InvalidArgumentException

|byte[]
|Passthrough
|Passthrough

|Memory<byte>
|Passthrough +
(from 3.2.6)
|InvalidArgumentException

|ReadOnlyMemory<byte>
|Passthrough +
(from 3.2.6)
|InvalidArgumentException

|IMemoryOwner<byte>
|InvalidArgumentException
|Passthrough +
(from 3.2.6)

|Other `Object`
|InvalidArgumentException
|InvalidArgumentException
|===

Here’s an example of using the `RawBinaryTranscoder`:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=binary,indent=0]
----

From version 3.2.6, the `RawBinaryTranscoder` will accept `Memory<byte>` and `ReadOnlyMemory<byte>` inputs and can return `IMemoryOwner<byte>` outputs.
Using these types may improve performance by not allocating large, temporary `byte[]` arrays on the heap.

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=binary-memory,indent=0]
----

== Custom Transcoders and Serializers
More advanced transcoding needs can be accomplished if the application implements their own transcoders and serializers.

=== Creating a Custom Serializer
We saw above one example of using Google Gson with the `RawJsonTranscoder`, but it requires the application to explicitly serialize and deserialize objects each time.
By creating a custom Gson serializer, we can avoid this.

It’s easy to create a serializer.  Simply implement the `ITypeSerializer` interface’s three methods:
[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=dotnet-serializer,indent=0]
----

In this case, there is no need to provide a custom transcoder.
The <<Default Behaviour,table for `JsonTranscoder`>> shows that it already does what we need: for any Object (that’s not a `byte[]`), it sends it to its serializer, and then stores the result in Couchbase with the JSON Common Flag set.
All we need to do is change the serializer, as so:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=custom-encode,indent=0]
----

And for decoding:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=custom-decode,indent=0]
----

Currently its not suggested that a custom JSON serializer be used globally in the Couchbase .NET SDK for anything other than K/V. This is because of streaming optimizations used in Query, FTS and Search that use JSON.NET features.

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=global,indent=0]
----

=== Creating a Custom Transcoder
Let’s look at a more complex example: encoding the JSON alternative, https://msgpack.org[MessagePack].
MessagePack is a compact binary data representation, so it should be stored with the binary Common Flag.
The Common Flag is chosen by the transcoder, and none of the existing transcoders matches our needs (`RawBinaryTranscoder` does set the binary flag, but it passes data through directly rather than using a serializer).
So we need to write one.

Start by creating a new serializer for MessagePack.  This is similar to the GsonSerializer example above:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=msgpack-serializer,indent=0]
----

And now create a transcoder that uses the `MsgPackSerializer`, and sets the binary Common Flag when storing the data:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=msgpack-transcoder,indent=0]
----

Note the use of `DataFormat.Binary`.  The other Common Flags that can be used are `DataFormat.Json` and `DataFormat.String`.

Create a POCO properly adjorned with the MessagePack attributes:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=msg-pack-poco,indent=0]
----

Now we can use the new transcoder to seamlessly store MessagePack data in Couchbase Server:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=msgpack-encode,indent=0]
----

== Further reading

* For _Common flags_, setting the data format used, see the xref:ref:data-structures.adoc#common-flags[Data Structures reference].
* _Format flags_ for ancient SDKs are still available for compatibility, if you are porting a long-lived legacy app.
See the xref:ref:data-structures.adoc#legacy-formats[Legacy formats reference].
* If you want to work with binary documents and our Search service, you might like to take a look at https://github.com/khanium/couchbase-fts-binary

Commit message:

NCBC-3544: Address incorrect references to "Google GSON" in Transcoders documentation
Text updated to reference System.Text.Json implementation instead.

modules/howtos/pages/transcoders-nonjson.adoc, after:

= Transcoders and Non-JSON Documents
:description: The .NET SDK supports common JSON document requirements out-of-the-box.
:page-topic-type: howtos

[abstract]
{description}
Custom transcoders and serializers provide support for applications needing to perform advanced operations, including supporting non-JSON data.

The .NET SDK uses the concepts of transcoders and serializers, which are used whenever data is sent to or retrieved from Couchbase Server.

When sending data to Couchbase, the SDK passes the Object being sent to a transcoder.
The transcoder can either reject the Object as being unsupported, or convert it into a `byte[]` and a Common Flag.
The Common Flag specifies whether the data is JSON, a non-JSON string, or raw binary data.
It may, but does not have to, use a serializer to perform the byte conversion.

On retrieving data from Couchbase, the fetched `byte[]` and Common Flag are passed to a transcoder.
The transcoder converts the bytes into a concrete class (the application specifies the required type) if possible.
It may use a serializer for this.

NOTE: Many applications will not need to be aware of transcoders and serializers, as the defaults support most standard JSON use cases.
The information in this page is only needed if the application has an advanced use-case, likely involving either non-JSON data, or a requirement for a particular JSON serialization library.

== Default Behaviour
The `ClusterOptions` contains a global transcoder and serializer, which by default are  `JsonTranscoder` and `DefaultSerializer`.

`DefaultSerializer` uses the flexible JSON library https://github.com/JamesNK/Newtonsoft.Json[JSON.NET] for serializing and deserializing byte arrays to and from concrete objects.

`SystemTextJsonSerializer` uses the more modern, high-performance, but also more strict `System.Text.Json` serializer instead.

On sending data to Couchbase, `JsonTranscoder` will send Objects to its serializer (`DefaultSerializer` by default) to convert into a `byte[]`.
The serialized bytes are then sent to the Couchbase Server, along with a Common Flag of JSON.

`JsonTranscoder` will pass any Object to its serializer, apart from a `byte[]`.
It will reject this with an InvalidArgumentException, as it is ambiguous how it should be handled.

On retrieving data from Couchbase, `JsonTranscoder` passes the fetched `byte[]` and Common Flag to its serializer (`DefaultSerializer` by default) to convert into a concrete class.

This table summarizes that information, and this more concise form will be used to describe the other transcoders included in the SDK.

[cols="3", options="header"]
|===
|Item
|Result
|Common Flag

|String
|Results of serializer
|JSON

|byte[]
|InvalidArgumentException
|-

|Other `Object`
|Results of serializer
|JSON
|===

== RawJsonTranscoder
The RawJsonTranscoder provides the ability for the application to explicitly specify that the data they are storing or retrieving is JSON.
This transcoder does not accept a serializer, and always performs straight pass through of the data to the server.
This enables the application to avoid unnecessary parsing costs when they are certain they are using JSON data.

It only accepts Strings and `byte[]`.

[cols="3", options="header"]
|===
|Item
|Result
|Common Flag

|String
|Passthrough
|JSON

|byte[]
|Passthrough
|JSON

|Other `Object`
|InvalidArgumentException
|-
|===

This transcoder is particularly useful when working with third-party JSON libraries.
Here we want to use https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.text.json?view=netcore-3.1[System.Text.Json] for serialization, instead of the default JSON.NET:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=raw-json-encode,indent=0]
----

Since System.Text.Json has already done the serialization work, we don't want to use the default `JsonTranscoder`, as this will run the provided String needlessly through `DefaultSerializer` (JSON.NET).
Instead, RawJsonTranscoder is used, which just passes through the serialized bytes, and stores them in Couchbase with the JSON Common Flag set.

Similarly, the same transcoder is used on reading the document, so the raw bytes can be retrieved in a String without going through `DefaultSerializer` (JSON.NET).
System.Text.Json can then be used for the deserialization.

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=raw-json-decode,indent=0]
----

== Non-JSON Transcoders
It is most common to store JSON with Couchbase.
However, it is possible to store non-JSON documents, such as raw binary data, perhaps using an concise binary encoding like https://msgpack.org[MessagePack] or https://cbor.io/[CBOR], in the Key-Value store.

NOTE: It's important to note that the Couchbase Data Platform includes multiple components other than the Key-Value store -- including Query and its indexes, FTS, Analytics, and Eventing -- and these are optimized for JSON and will either ignore or provide limited functionality with non-JSON documents.

Also note that some simple data types can be stored directly as JSON, without recourse to non-JSON transcoding.
A valid JSON document can be a simple integer (`42`), string (`"hello"`), array (`[1,2,3]`), boolean (`true`, `false`) and the JSON `null` value.

=== RawStringTranscoder
The RawStringTranscoder provides the ability for the user to explicitly store and retrieve raw string data with Couchbase.
It can be used to avoid the overhead of storing the string as JSON, which requires two bytes for double quotes, plus potentially more for escaping characters.

Note that this transcoder does not accept a serializer, and always performs straight passthrough of the data to the server.  It only accepts Strings.

[cols="3", options="header"]
|===
|Item
|Result
|Common Flag

|String
|Passthrough
|String

|byte[]
|InvalidArgumentException
|-

|Other `Object`
|InvalidArgumentException
|-
|===

Here’s an example of using the `RawStringTranscoder`:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=string,indent=0]
----

=== RawBinaryTranscoder
The RawBinaryTranscoder provides the ability for the user to explicitly store and retrieve raw byte data to Couchbase.
The transcoder does not perform any form of real transcoding, and does not take a serializer, but rather passes the data through and assigns the appropriate `Binary` Common Flag (except in the case of an exception).

[cols="3", options="header"]
|===
|Item
|Encoding Result
|Decoding Result

|String
|InvalidArgumentException
|InvalidArgumentException

|byte[]
|Passthrough
|Passthrough

|Memory<byte>
|Passthrough +
(from 3.2.6)
|InvalidArgumentException

|ReadOnlyMemory<byte>
|Passthrough +
(from 3.2.6)
|InvalidArgumentException

|IMemoryOwner<byte>
|InvalidArgumentException
|Passthrough +
(from 3.2.6)

|Other `Object`
|InvalidArgumentException
|InvalidArgumentException
|===

Here’s an example of using the `RawBinaryTranscoder`:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=binary,indent=0]
----

From version 3.2.6, the `RawBinaryTranscoder` will accept `Memory<byte>` and `ReadOnlyMemory<byte>` inputs and can return `IMemoryOwner<byte>` outputs.
Using these types may improve performance by not allocating large, temporary `byte[]` arrays on the heap.

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=binary-memory,indent=0]
----

== Custom Transcoders and Serializers
More advanced transcoding needs can be accomplished if the application implements their own transcoders and serializers.

=== Creating a Custom Serializer
We saw above one example of using System.Text.Json with the `RawJsonTranscoder`, but it requires the application to explicitly serialize and deserialize objects each time.
By creating a custom JSON serializer, we can avoid this.

It’s easy to create a serializer.  Simply implement the `ITypeSerializer` interface’s three methods:
[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=dotnet-serializer,indent=0]
----

In this case, there is no need to provide a custom transcoder.
The <<Default Behaviour,table for `JsonTranscoder`>> shows that it already does what we need: for any Object (that’s not a `byte[]`), it sends it to its serializer, and then stores the result in Couchbase with the JSON Common Flag set.
All we need to do is change the serializer, as so:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=custom-encode,indent=0]
----

And for decoding:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=custom-decode,indent=0]
----

Currently its not suggested that a custom JSON serializer be used globally in the Couchbase .NET SDK for anything other than K/V.
This is because of streaming optimizations used in Query, FTS and Search that use JSON.NET features.
These internals are gradually being migrated to the `SystemTextJsonSerializer` for improved performance.
[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=global,indent=0]
----

=== Creating a Custom Transcoder
Let’s look at a more complex example: encoding the JSON alternative, https://msgpack.org[MessagePack].
MessagePack is a compact binary data representation, so it should be stored with the binary Common Flag.
The Common Flag is chosen by the transcoder, and none of the existing transcoders matches our needs (`RawBinaryTranscoder` does set the binary flag, but it passes data through directly rather than using a serializer).
So we need to write one.

Start by creating a new serializer for MessagePack.  This is similar to the custom JSON Serializer example above:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=msgpack-serializer,indent=0]
----

And now create a transcoder that uses the `MsgPackSerializer`, and sets the binary Common Flag when storing the data:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=msgpack-transcoder,indent=0]
----

Note the use of `DataFormat.Binary`.  The other Common Flags that can be used are `DataFormat.Json` and `DataFormat.String`.

Create a POCO properly adjorned with the MessagePack attributes:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=msg-pack-poco,indent=0]
----

Now we can use the new transcoder to seamlessly store MessagePack data in Couchbase Server:

[source,csharp]
----
include::example$Transcoding.csx[tag=msgpack-encode,indent=0]
----

== Further reading

* For _Common flags_, setting the data format used, see the xref:ref:data-structures.adoc#common-flags[Data Structures reference].
* _Format flags_ for ancient SDKs are still available for compatibility, if you are porting a long-lived legacy app.
See the xref:ref:data-structures.adoc#legacy-formats[Legacy formats reference].
* If you want to work with binary documents and our Search service, you might like to take a look at https://github.com/khanium/couchbase-fts-binary
