modules/project-docs/pages/compatibility.adoc, before:

= Compatibility of Couchbase Features, Couchbase Server Versions, and the Couchbase .NET SDK
:navtitle: Compatibility
:page-aliases: ROOT:overview,ROOT:compatibility-versions-features,compatibility-versions-features

[abstract]
Features available in different SDK versions, and compatibility between Server and SDK.
Plus notes on Cloud, networks, and AWS Lambda.


== Couchbase Version/SDK Version Matrix

Couchbase SDKs are tested against a variety of different environments to ensure both backward and forward compatibility with different versions of Couchbase Server.
The matrix below denotes the version of Couchbase Server, the version of the .NET SDK and whether the SDK is:

* ✖ *Unsupported*: This combination is not tested, and is not within the scope of technical support if you have purchased a support agreement.
* ◎ *Compatible*: This combination has been tested previously, and should be compatible.
This combination is not recommended by our technical support organization.
It is best to upgrade either the SDK or the Couchbase version you are using.
* ✔ *Supported*:This combination is subject to ongoing quality assurance, and is fully supported by our technical support organization.

.Recommended SDK per Server Version Matrix
[#table_sdk_versions]
[cols="40,25,20,20,25"]
|===
| | SDK 2.4, 2.5 | SDK 2.6 | SDK 2.7  | SDK 3.0, 3.1 

| *Server 5.0-5.5*
| *✔*
| *✔*
| *✔*
| ◎

| *Server 6.0*
| ◎
| *✔*
| *✔*
| *✔*


| *Server 6.5-6.6*
| *✖*
| ◎
| *✔*
| *✔*

| *Server 7.0β*
| *✖*
| *✖*
| *◎*
| *✔*
|===

Note the https://www.couchbase.com/support-policy[End of Life dates^] for Couchbase Server and SDK versions.
See the notes there for Support details.

== Couchbase New Feature Availability Matrix

.Couchbase Server and SDK Supported Version Matrix
[.table-merge-cells] 
[cols="7,7,5,6,5"]
|===
| | Server 5.0, 5.1, & 5.5 | Server 6.0 | Server 6.5 & 6.6 | Server 7.0β

| Enhanced Durability
4+| All SDK versions

| Durable Writes 
2+| Not Supported
2+| Since 3.0

| Analytics
| DP in 5.5 with 2.6
3+| Since 2.7

| Distributed ACID Transactions
2+| Not Supported
2+| Since 3.0.5 & Server 6.6footnote:[Using separate .NET Transactions Library]

| Collections
2+| Not Supported
| SDK 3.0 for Developer Preview in Server 6.5 & 6.6
| Since 3.0

| Scope-Level N1QL Queries
3+| Not Supported
| Developer Preview in 7.0β, SDK 3.0.5
|===




== .NET Framework Version Compatibility

include::hello-world:partial$supported.adoc[]
Other .NET implementations might work but are not tested and are outside of the scope of our technical support organization.

include::6.5@sdk:shared:partial$network-requirements.adoc[]


include::6.5@sdk:shared:partial$interface-stability-pars.adoc[tag=interface-stability-section]

Commit message:

porting 3.1 fixes that missed cut to 3.2 (#197)
* DOC-7888 update RBAC for ScopeAdmin

See https://issues.couchbase.com/browse/MB-45234?focusedCommentId=497109#comment-497109
via @dnault

Note the RBAC link to server page will also need to be updated

* DOC-7888 update name of Manage Scopes

* typo

* .

* Java -->  C#

* dotnet 3.X and couchbase beta 7 compatibility

* Gardening

Corrected sigil, removed duplicate line

Co-authored-by: Richard Smedley <rgsmedley@gmail.com>
Co-authored-by: jeffrymorris <jeffrymorris@gmail.com>

modules/project-docs/pages/compatibility.adoc, after:

= Compatibility of Couchbase Features, Couchbase Server Versions, and the Couchbase .NET SDK
:navtitle: Compatibility
:page-aliases: ROOT:overview,ROOT:compatibility-versions-features,compatibility-versions-features

[abstract]
Features available in different SDK versions, and compatibility between Server and SDK.
Plus notes on Cloud, networks, and AWS Lambda.


== Couchbase Version/SDK Version Matrix

Couchbase SDKs are tested against a variety of different environments to ensure both backward and forward compatibility with different versions of Couchbase Server.
The matrix below denotes the version of Couchbase Server, the version of the .NET SDK and whether the SDK is:

* ✖ *Unsupported*: This combination is not tested, and is not within the scope of technical support if you have purchased a support agreement.
* ◎ *Compatible*: This combination has been tested previously, and should be compatible.
This combination is not recommended by our technical support organization.
It is best to upgrade either the SDK or the Couchbase version you are using.
* ✔ *Supported*:This combination is subject to ongoing quality assurance, and is fully supported by our technical support organization.

.Recommended SDK per Server Version Matrix
[#table_sdk_versions]
[cols="40,25,20,20,25"]
|===
| | SDK 2.4, 2.5 | SDK 2.6 | SDK 2.7  | SDK 3.0, 3.1 

| *Server 5.0-5.5*
| *✔*
| *✔*
| *✔*
| ◎

| *Server 6.0*
| ◎
| *✔*
| *✔*
| *✔*


| *Server 6.5-6.6*
| *✖*
| ◎
| *✔*
| *✔*

| *Server 7.0β*
| *✖*
| *✖*
| *◎*
| *◎* _(see below)_
|===

[IMPORTANT]
====
An API change in the planned release version of Couchbase Server 7.0 means changes in the latest versions of the SDK which render these new SDK versions incompatible with the beta versions of 7.0.

Dotnet SDK *3.1.6* is the latest version compatible with Server 7.0β.

Later SDK 3.1.x releases will be limited to the Default Scope and Collection with the beta 7.0 server, and will only be fully compatible with the full release version.
====

Note the https://www.couchbase.com/support-policy[End of Life dates^] for Couchbase Server and SDK versions.
See the notes there for Support details.

== Couchbase New Feature Availability Matrix

.Couchbase Server and SDK Supported Version Matrix
[.table-merge-cells] 
[cols="7,7,5,6,5"]
|===
| | Server 5.0, 5.1, & 5.5 | Server 6.0 | Server 6.5 & 6.6 | Server 7.0β

| Enhanced Durability
4+| All SDK versions

| Durable Writes 
2+| Not Supported
2+| Since 3.0

| Analytics
| DP in 5.5 with 2.6
3+| Since 2.7

| Distributed ACID Transactions
2+| Not Supported
2+| Since 3.0.5 & Server 6.6footnote:[Using separate .NET Transactions Library]

| Collections
2+| Not Supported
| SDK 3.0 for Developer Preview in Server 6.5 & 6.6
| Since 3.0

| Scope-Level N1QL Queries
3+| Not Supported
| Developer Preview in 7.0β, SDK 3.0.5
|===




== .NET Framework Version Compatibility

include::hello-world:partial$supported.adoc[]
Other .NET implementations might work but are not tested and are outside of the scope of our technical support organization.

include::6.5@sdk:shared:partial$network-requirements.adoc[]


include::6.5@sdk:shared:partial$interface-stability-pars.adoc[tag=interface-stability-section]
