modules/concept-docs/pages/n1ql-query.adoc, before:

= Querying with N1QL
:description: Parallel data management for complex queries over many records, using a familiar SQL-like syntax.
:nav-title: Querying with N1QL
:page-topic-type: concept
:page-aliases: ROOT:n1ql-query,ROOT:prepared-statements,ROOT:querying

include::project-docs:partial$attributes.adoc[]

[abstract]
{description}


include::{version-server}@sdk:shared:partial$n1ql-queries.adoc[tag=intro]


// Prepared Statements for Query Optimization
include::{version-server}@sdk:shared:partial$n1ql-queries.adoc[tag=prepared]

For the .NET SDK, the `adhoc` parameter is `AdHoc`, and should be set to `false` for a plan to be prepared, or a prepared plan to be reused.
Do not turn off the `AdHoc` flag for _every_ query to Server 6.0 and earlier, since only a finite number of query plans (currently 5000) can be stored in the SDK.

[source,csharp]
----
var result = await cluster.QueryAsync<dynamic>(
    "select count(*) from `travel-sample`.inventory.airport where country = ?",
    options =>
        options.Parameter("Country")
        .AdHoc(false);
);
----

CAUTION: *When running an application using Prepared Statements through the .NET SDK* -- if you plan to upgrade Couchbase Server from 6.0.x or earlier to 6.5.0 or later, and are running a version of the .NET SDK prior to xref:project-docs:sdk-release-notes.adoc#version-3-0-1-13-may-2020[3.0.1], you will need to xref:7.1@server:install:upgrade-strategy-for-features.adoc#prepared-statements[restart the app or otherwise work around] a change in the Server's behaviour.


== Indexes

The Couchbase query service makes use of xref:7.1@server:learn:services-and-indexes/indexes/indexes.adoc[_indexes_] in order to do its work.
Indexes replicate subsets of documents from data nodes over to index nodes,
allowing specific data (for example, specific document properties) to be retrieved quickly,
and to distribute load away from data nodes in xref:7.1@server:learn:services-and-indexes/services/services.adoc[MDS] topologies.

[IMPORTANT]
In order to make a bucket queryable, it must have at least one index defined.

You can define a _primary index_ on a bucket.
When a _primary_ index is defined you can issue non-covered (see below) queries on the bucket as well.
This includes using the `META` function in the queries.

[source,n1ql]
----
CREATE PRIMARY INDEX ON `users`
----

You can also define indexes over given document fields and then use those fields in the query:

[source,n1ql]
----
CREATE INDEX ix_name ON `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel(name);
CREATE INDEX ix_email ON `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel(email);
----

This would allow you to query the _travel-sample_ bucket's hotel collection regarding a document's `name` or `email` properties, thus:

[source,n1ql]
----
SELECT name, email
FROM `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel
WHERE name="Glasgow Grand Central" OR email="grandcentralhotel@example.com";
----

You can also query a bucket's default collection, as with this straight-forward example for a _users_ bucket.

[source,n1ql]
----
CREATE INDEX ix_users_name ON `users`(name);
CREATE INDEX ix_users_email ON `users`(email);

SELECT name, email FROM `users` WHERE name="Monty Python" OR email="monty@python.org";
----

Indexes help improve the performance of a query.
When an index includes the actual values of all the fields specified in the query,
the index _covers_ the query, and eliminates the need to fetch the actual values from the Data Service.
An index, in this case, is called a _covering index_, and the query is called a _covered_ query.
For more information, see xref:7.1@server:n1ql:n1ql-language-reference/covering-indexes.adoc[Covering Indexes].

You can also create and define indexes in the SDK using:

[source,csharp]
----
var bucketManager = bucket.CreateManager();
await bucketManager.CreateN1qlPrimaryIndexAsync();
await bucketManager.CreateN1qlIndexAsync("index_name", new string[] { "name" })
await bucketManager.CreateN1qlIndexAsync("index_email", new string[] { "email" })
----


== Index Building

Creating indexes on buckets with many existing documents can take a long time.
You can build indexes in the background, creating _deferred_ indexes.
The deferred indexes can be built together, rather than having to re-scan the entire bucket for each index.

[source,sql]
----
CREATE PRIMARY INDEX ON `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel WITH {"defer_build": true};
CREATE INDEX ix_name ON `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel(name) WITH {"defer_build": true};
CREATE INDEX ix_email ON `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel(email) WITH {"defer_build": true};
BUILD INDEX ON `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel(`#primary`, `ix_name`, `ix_email`);
----

The indexes are not built until the `BUILD INDEX` statement is executed.
At this point, the server scans all of the documents in the `hotel` collection,
and indexes it for all of the applicable indexes (in this case, those that have a `name` or `email` field).

Building deferred indexes can also be done via the SDK:

[source,csharp]
----
var bucketManager = bucket.CreateManager();
await bucketManager.CreateN1qlPrimaryIndexAsync(defer = true);
await bucketManager.CreateN1qlIndexAsync("ix_name", defer = true, new string[] { "name" });
await bucketManager.CreateN1qlIndexAsync("ix_email", defer = true, new string[] { "email" });
await bucketManager.BuildN1qlDeferredIndexesAsync();
await bucketManager.WatchN1qlIndexes(new List<string> { "ix_name", "ix_email", "#primary"}, TimeSpan.FromSeconds(2));
----


// Index Consistency
include::{version-server}@sdk:shared:partial$n1ql-queries.adoc[tag=index-consistency]

The following options are available:

include::7.1@server:learn:page$services-and-indexes/indexes/index-replication.adoc[tag=scan_consistency]
////
* `not_bounded`: Executes the query immediately, without requiring any consistency for the query.
If index-maintenance is running behind, out-of-date results may be returned.
* `at_plus`: Executes the query, requiring indexes first to be updated to the timestamp of the last update.
If index-maintenance is running behind, the query waits for it to catch up.
* `request_plus`: Executes the query, requiring the indexes first to be updated to the timestamp of the current query-request.
If index-maintenance is running behind, the query waits for it to catch up.

For N1QL, the default consistency is `not_bounded`.
////
Consider the following snippet:

[source,csharp]
----

var randomNumber = new Random().Next(0, 10000000);

bucket.Upsert($"user:{randomNumber}", new {
    name = "Brass Doorknob",
    email = "brass.doorknob@juno.com",
    random = randomNumber
});

var query = new QueryRequest("SELECT name, email, random, META(default).id FROM default WHERE $1 IN name'")
    .AddPositionalParamter("Brass");

var result = bucket.Query<dynamic>(query);
----

The above query may not return the newly inserted document because it has not yet been indexed.
The query is issued immediately after document creation, and in this case the query engine may process the query before the index has been updated.

If the above code is modified to use _RequestPlus_, query processing will wait until all updates have been processed and recalculated into the index from the point in time the query was received:

[source,csharp]
----
var query = new QueryRequest("SELECT name, email, random, META(default).id FROM default WHERE $1 IN name'")
    .AddPositionalParamter("Brass")
    // If this line is removed, the latest 'random' field might not be present
    .ScanConsistency(ScanConsistency.RequestPlus);

var result = bucket.Query<dynamic>(query);
----

This gives the application developer more control over the balance between performance (latency) and consistency,
and allows optimization on a case-by-case basis.




////
** Awaiting LINQ updates **

== Building Statements with LINQ

[NOTE]
LINQ is a community project.
Although it works well with Couchbase, it is not part of the officially-supported product.

LINQ (Language Integrated Query), is a powerful way to guide you in building your statements:
you obtain Type safety and auto completion of relevant methods and N1QL clauses.
It implements https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/mt693024.aspx[Microsoft’s language integrated query extensions to the C# language],
and is similar to other LINQ providers like Linq2SQL, Entity Framework and NHibernate.
The difference is that it emits N1QL in place of SQL.
If you have used any other LINQ provider, you will find its familiarity and consistency make it an easy transition.

_Linq2Couchbase_, the LINQ provider for the Couchbase .NET SDK, is a stand-alone project which depends on Couchbase .NET SDK
and can be found on https://www.nuget.org/packages/linq2Couchbase[NuGet] -- and by using the NuGet package manager to include the dependency:

[source]
----
PM> Install-Package Linq2Couchbase
----

Once you have included the dependency, you can construct queries just like any other LINQ provider in a SQL-like fashion. Nearly all N1QL statements and functions are supported, for example:

* INNER, LEFT Outer, and Index JOINs
* Math and Date functions
* Filtering, projections and sorting
* Grouping and aggregations
* META keyword, NEST and UNNEST
* Etc.

In addition to N1QL language features, Linq2Coucbase supports ORM features like Change-tracking, and mapping of JSON fields to keys and other POCO properties.
The provider’s core object is the `BucketContext`, which is a Unit of Work (UoW) type object for performing querying and mutations on a per request basis.
////

Commit message:

changed N1QL to {sqlpp} in running text (#289)

modules/concept-docs/pages/n1ql-query.adoc, after:

= Querying with {sqlpp}
:description: Parallel data management for complex queries over many records, using a familiar SQL-like syntax.
:nav-title: Querying with {sqlpp}
:page-topic-type: concept
:page-aliases: ROOT:n1ql-query,ROOT:prepared-statements,ROOT:querying

include::project-docs:partial$attributes.adoc[]

[abstract]
{description}


include::{version-server}@sdk:shared:partial$n1ql-queries.adoc[tag=intro]


// Prepared Statements for Query Optimization
include::{version-server}@sdk:shared:partial$n1ql-queries.adoc[tag=prepared]

For the .NET SDK, the `adhoc` parameter is `AdHoc`, and should be set to `false` for a plan to be prepared, or a prepared plan to be reused.
Do not turn off the `AdHoc` flag for _every_ query to Server 6.0 and earlier, since only a finite number of query plans (currently 5000) can be stored in the SDK.

[source,csharp]
----
var result = await cluster.QueryAsync<dynamic>(
    "select count(*) from `travel-sample`.inventory.airport where country = ?",
    options =>
        options.Parameter("Country")
        .AdHoc(false);
);
----

CAUTION: *When running an application using Prepared Statements through the .NET SDK* -- if you plan to upgrade Couchbase Server from 6.0.x or earlier to 6.5.0 or later, and are running a version of the .NET SDK prior to xref:project-docs:sdk-release-notes.adoc#version-3-0-1-13-may-2020[3.0.1], you will need to xref:7.1@server:install:upgrade-strategy-for-features.adoc#prepared-statements[restart the app or otherwise work around] a change in the Server's behaviour.


== Indexes

The Couchbase query service makes use of xref:7.1@server:learn:services-and-indexes/indexes/indexes.adoc[_indexes_] in order to do its work.
Indexes replicate subsets of documents from data nodes over to index nodes,
allowing specific data (for example, specific document properties) to be retrieved quickly,
and to distribute load away from data nodes in xref:7.1@server:learn:services-and-indexes/services/services.adoc[MDS] topologies.

[IMPORTANT]
In order to make a bucket queryable, it must have at least one index defined.

You can define a _primary index_ on a bucket.
When a _primary_ index is defined you can issue non-covered (see below) queries on the bucket as well.
This includes using the `META` function in the queries.

[source,n1ql]
----
CREATE PRIMARY INDEX ON `users`
----

You can also define indexes over given document fields and then use those fields in the query:

[source,n1ql]
----
CREATE INDEX ix_name ON `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel(name);
CREATE INDEX ix_email ON `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel(email);
----

This would allow you to query the _travel-sample_ bucket's hotel collection regarding a document's `name` or `email` properties, thus:

[source,n1ql]
----
SELECT name, email
FROM `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel
WHERE name="Glasgow Grand Central" OR email="grandcentralhotel@example.com";
----

You can also query a bucket's default collection, as with this straight-forward example for a _users_ bucket.

[source,n1ql]
----
CREATE INDEX ix_users_name ON `users`(name);
CREATE INDEX ix_users_email ON `users`(email);

SELECT name, email FROM `users` WHERE name="Monty Python" OR email="monty@python.org";
----

Indexes help improve the performance of a query.
When an index includes the actual values of all the fields specified in the query,
the index _covers_ the query, and eliminates the need to fetch the actual values from the Data Service.
An index, in this case, is called a _covering index_, and the query is called a _covered_ query.
For more information, see xref:7.1@server:n1ql:n1ql-language-reference/covering-indexes.adoc[Covering Indexes].

You can also create and define indexes in the SDK using:

[source,csharp]
----
var bucketManager = bucket.CreateManager();
await bucketManager.CreateN1qlPrimaryIndexAsync();
await bucketManager.CreateN1qlIndexAsync("index_name", new string[] { "name" })
await bucketManager.CreateN1qlIndexAsync("index_email", new string[] { "email" })
----


== Index Building

Creating indexes on buckets with many existing documents can take a long time.
You can build indexes in the background, creating _deferred_ indexes.
The deferred indexes can be built together, rather than having to re-scan the entire bucket for each index.

[source,sql]
----
CREATE PRIMARY INDEX ON `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel WITH {"defer_build": true};
CREATE INDEX ix_name ON `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel(name) WITH {"defer_build": true};
CREATE INDEX ix_email ON `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel(email) WITH {"defer_build": true};
BUILD INDEX ON `travel-sample`.inventory.hotel(`#primary`, `ix_name`, `ix_email`);
----

The indexes are not built until the `BUILD INDEX` statement is executed.
At this point, the server scans all of the documents in the `hotel` collection,
and indexes it for all of the applicable indexes (in this case, those that have a `name` or `email` field).

Building deferred indexes can also be done via the SDK:

[source,csharp]
----
var bucketManager = bucket.CreateManager();
await bucketManager.CreateN1qlPrimaryIndexAsync(defer = true);
await bucketManager.CreateN1qlIndexAsync("ix_name", defer = true, new string[] { "name" });
await bucketManager.CreateN1qlIndexAsync("ix_email", defer = true, new string[] { "email" });
await bucketManager.BuildN1qlDeferredIndexesAsync();
await bucketManager.WatchN1qlIndexes(new List<string> { "ix_name", "ix_email", "#primary"}, TimeSpan.FromSeconds(2));
----


// Index Consistency
include::{version-server}@sdk:shared:partial$n1ql-queries.adoc[tag=index-consistency]

The following options are available:

include::7.1@server:learn:page$services-and-indexes/indexes/index-replication.adoc[tag=scan_consistency]
////
* `not_bounded`: Executes the query immediately, without requiring any consistency for the query.
If index-maintenance is running behind, out-of-date results may be returned.
* `at_plus`: Executes the query, requiring indexes first to be updated to the timestamp of the last update.
If index-maintenance is running behind, the query waits for it to catch up.
* `request_plus`: Executes the query, requiring the indexes first to be updated to the timestamp of the current query-request.
If index-maintenance is running behind, the query waits for it to catch up.

For SQL++, the default consistency is `not_bounded`.
////
Consider the following snippet:

[source,csharp]
----

var randomNumber = new Random().Next(0, 10000000);

bucket.Upsert($"user:{randomNumber}", new {
    name = "Brass Doorknob",
    email = "brass.doorknob@juno.com",
    random = randomNumber
});

var query = new QueryRequest("SELECT name, email, random, META(default).id FROM default WHERE $1 IN name'")
    .AddPositionalParamter("Brass");

var result = bucket.Query<dynamic>(query);
----

The above query may not return the newly inserted document because it has not yet been indexed.
The query is issued immediately after document creation, and in this case the query engine may process the query before the index has been updated.

If the above code is modified to use _RequestPlus_, query processing will wait until all updates have been processed and recalculated into the index from the point in time the query was received:

[source,csharp]
----
var query = new QueryRequest("SELECT name, email, random, META(default).id FROM default WHERE $1 IN name'")
    .AddPositionalParamter("Brass")
    // If this line is removed, the latest 'random' field might not be present
    .ScanConsistency(ScanConsistency.RequestPlus);

var result = bucket.Query<dynamic>(query);
----

This gives the application developer more control over the balance between performance (latency) and consistency,
and allows optimization on a case-by-case basis.




////
** Awaiting LINQ updates **

== Building Statements with LINQ

[NOTE]
LINQ is a community project.
Although it works well with Couchbase, it is not part of the officially-supported product.

LINQ (Language Integrated Query), is a powerful way to guide you in building your statements:
you obtain Type safety and auto completion of relevant methods and {sqlpp} clauses.
It implements https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/mt693024.aspx[Microsoft’s language integrated query extensions to the C# language],
and is similar to other LINQ providers like Linq2SQL, Entity Framework and NHibernate.
The difference is that it emits {sqlpp} in place of SQL.
If you have used any other LINQ provider, you will find its familiarity and consistency make it an easy transition.

_Linq2Couchbase_, the LINQ provider for the Couchbase .NET SDK, is a stand-alone project which depends on Couchbase .NET SDK
and can be found on https://www.nuget.org/packages/linq2Couchbase[NuGet] -- and by using the NuGet package manager to include the dependency:

[source]
----
PM> Install-Package Linq2Couchbase
----

Once you have included the dependency, you can construct queries just like any other LINQ provider in a SQL-like fashion. Nearly all {sqlpp} statements and functions are supported, for example:

* INNER, LEFT Outer, and Index JOINs
* Math and Date functions
* Filtering, projections and sorting
* Grouping and aggregations
* META keyword, NEST and UNNEST
* Etc.

In addition to {sqlpp} language features, Linq2Coucbase supports ORM features like Change-tracking, and mapping of JSON fields to keys and other POCO properties.
The provider’s core object is the `BucketContext`, which is a Unit of Work (UoW) type object for performing querying and mutations on a per request basis.
////
