modules/hello-world/pages/platform-help.adoc, before:

= Setting Up Couchbase .NET SDK with Visual Studio 2019 or VSCode
:page-aliases: ROOT:platform-introduction,ROOT:platform-help,
:navtitle: Setting Up the .NET SDK

[abstract]
Discover how to get up and running developing applications with the Couchbase .NET SDK 3.0+ using `Visual Studio 2019` or `Visual Studio Code`. 

== Using an IDE (Visual Studio 2019 Community)
* Download Visual Studio 2019 for Windows; note that the Community edition is free! https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/

* Click on the Visual Studio Installer and select the following work flows
    - .NET desktop development (required for demos)
    - ASP.NET and web development (optional)

* Click `Install` and let the installation continue; we suggest leaving the defaults in place.

* Once installation has been completed, you can create a new application by including a dependency on the .NET SDK via NuGet or by downloading an example application that already has the dependencies defined.

* Details for installing Visual Studio on other operating systems can be found here:
 - MacOS: https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/mac/activation/
 - Linux: Currently there is no support for Visual Studio 2019 on Linux. Please see the <<#vscode, VSCode>> section.

[#vscode]
== Using a Code Editor (Visual Studio Code) 
Visual Studio Code is a free code editor which runs on Windows, Linux and MacOS and can be downloaded link:https://code.visualstudio.com/[here]. Once downloaded, follow the installation details for the relevant platform:

* MacOS: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/mac
* Windows: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/windows
* Linux: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/linux

=== Adding C# Development Support
VSCode is an editor, so in order to have support for various languages like C#, GO, Python, etc. you will need to install a 3rd party extension which supports development in said programming language. For .NET, we suggest using `ms-dotnettools.csharp` which allows for development in link:https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/languages/csharp[C#], the most commonly used .NET language.

* Navigate to https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-dotnettools.csharp
* Click on `Install` at the top, left hand side.
* Select `Open Visual Studio Code` which will install `ms-dotnettools.csharp` into the VSCode editor
* Alternatively, install from VSCode directly:
    - Open VSCode
    - Select the `Extensions` button on the left hand side
    - Type ms-dotnettools.csharp into the `Search Extensions Marketplace` textbox and hit enter
    - Select and install the language extension into the editor.

== Installing SDK Core
NOTE: This doesn’t need to be done if you're using Visual Studio 2019; however, it is required if you are using VSCode because it is not installed by default.

* For Windows use the installer: https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/thank-you/dotnet-sdk-3.0.100-windows-x64-installer
* For linux select the distro you want to develop on: https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/linux-package-manager/rhel/sdk-current
* For MacOs use the installer: https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/thank-you/dotnet-sdk-3.0.100-macos-x64-installer

== Getting started developing with the SDK

=== Using Visual Studio Community
[{tabs}]
==== 
Windows::
+
--
Open Visual Studio from the start menu and click File=>New=>Project:

* In the New Project dialogue, Installed=>Visual C# from the top Menu 
    - Select `Console App (.NET Core)`
    - Type `CouchbaseExample` in the `Name` textbox
    - Leave the `Location` textbox to its default
    - Leave the `Solution Name` to its default
    - Click `Ok` - a solution and project will be created
* Add the NuGet dependency on `CouchbaseNetClient` to the project:
    - Right Click on the `CouchbaseExample` project in the `Solution Explorer` pane of Visual Studio
    - In the Context Menu select `Manage NuGet Packages…`
    - Click `Browse` in the NuGet Package Manager
    - Type `CouchbaseNetClient` into the search text box making sure `Include Pre-Release` checkbox is selected if you wish to see pre-GA releases
    - Select the version to install from the dropdown and click `Install`
--
MacOS::
+
--
Open Visual Studio and click File=>New=>Solution:

* In the New Project dialogue, Web and Console=>App from the Menu on the Left:
    - Select `Console Application and C#` from the small dropdown (already selected by default)
    - Leave the `Target Framework` to its default
    - Type `CouchbaseExample` in the `Project Name` textbox
    - Leave the `Solution Name` to its default
    - Leave the `Location` textbox to its default
    - Click `Ok` - a solution and project will be created
* Add the NuGet dependency on `CouchbaseNetClient` to the project:
    - Right Click on the `CouchbaseExample` project in the `Solution Explorer` pane of Visual Studio
    - In the Context Menu select `Manage NuGet Packages…`
    - Select `Browse` in the NuGet Package Manager
    - Type `CouchbaseNetClient` into the search text box making sure `Include Pre-Release` checkbox is selected if you wish to see pre-GA releases
    - Select the version to install from the dropdown and click `Add Package`
--
====

=== Using VSCode
If you are using VSCode it is often easier to use both the editor and the Command Line Interface (CLI):

* Open a terminal and make a directory for your project: `mkdir CouchbaseExample`

* Go into the directory: `cd CouchbaseExample`

* Create the console project: `dotnet new console`

* Install the CouchbaseNetClient package: `dotnet add package CouchbaseNetClient`           

* Run the application: `dotnet run`

You should see a `Hello World` message printed in your terminal, which means the application has run successfully. 

Now you can launch VSCode and open the `CouchbaseExample` directory to start editing the `Program.cs` file.

More details can be found here: https://dotnet.microsoft.com/learn/dotnet/hello-world-tutorial/intro.

That's it! You are now ready to start developing your Couchbase application..

Commit message:

"Is This Page for You?"
& spacing (for maintenance, not semantic)

modules/hello-world/pages/platform-help.adoc, after:

= Setting Up Couchbase .NET SDK with Visual Studio 2019 or VSCode
:page-aliases: ROOT:platform-introduction,ROOT:platform-help,
:navtitle: Setting Up the .NET SDK

[abstract]
Discover how to get up and running developing applications with the Couchbase .NET SDK 3.0+ using `Visual Studio 2019` or `Visual Studio Code`. 


A simple .NET orientation intro for _non-_.NET folk who are evaluating the Couchbase .NET SDK.

[IMPORTANT]
.Is This Page for You?
====
This page is to help evaluate the Couchbase .NET SDK, if .NET is not where you spend the majority of your working day. 
It is aimed at Software Architects, QE folk, managers, and anyone else who needs to run through using the .NET SDK without necessarily being comfortable with C# and the .NET environment.
If this is not you, head back to the xref:overview.adoc[rest of the Couchbase .NET SDK documentation].
====


== Using an IDE (Visual Studio 2019 Community)

* Download Visual Studio 2019 for Windows; note that the Community edition is free! https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/

* Click on the Visual Studio Installer and select the following work flows
    - .NET desktop development (required for demos)
    - ASP.NET and web development (optional)

* Click `Install` and let the installation continue; we suggest leaving the defaults in place.

* Once installation has been completed, you can create a new application by including a dependency on the .NET SDK via NuGet or by downloading an example application that already has the dependencies defined.

* Details for installing Visual Studio on other operating systems can be found here:
 - MacOS: https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/mac/activation/
 - Linux: Currently there is no support for Visual Studio 2019 on Linux. Please see the <<#vscode, VSCode>> section.


[#vscode]
== Using a Code Editor (Visual Studio Code) 

Visual Studio Code is a free code editor which runs on Windows, Linux and MacOS and can be downloaded link:https://code.visualstudio.com/[here]. Once downloaded, follow the installation details for the relevant platform:

* MacOS: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/mac
* Windows: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/windows
* Linux: https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/linux

=== Adding C# Development Support

VSCode is an editor, so in order to have support for various languages like C#, GO, Python, etc. you will need to install a 3rd party extension which supports development in said programming language. For .NET, we suggest using `ms-dotnettools.csharp` which allows for development in link:https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/languages/csharp[C#], the most commonly used .NET language.

* Navigate to https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-dotnettools.csharp
* Click on `Install` at the top, left hand side.
* Select `Open Visual Studio Code` which will install `ms-dotnettools.csharp` into the VSCode editor
* Alternatively, install from VSCode directly:
    - Open VSCode
    - Select the `Extensions` button on the left hand side
    - Type ms-dotnettools.csharp into the `Search Extensions Marketplace` textbox and hit enter
    - Select and install the language extension into the editor.


== Installing SDK Core

NOTE: This doesn’t need to be done if you're using Visual Studio 2019; however, it is required if you are using VSCode because it is not installed by default.

* For Windows use the installer: https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/thank-you/dotnet-sdk-3.0.100-windows-x64-installer
* For linux select the distro you want to develop on: https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/linux-package-manager/rhel/sdk-current
* For MacOs use the installer: https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/thank-you/dotnet-sdk-3.0.100-macos-x64-installer


== Getting started developing with the SDK

=== Using Visual Studio Community
[{tabs}]
==== 
Windows::
+
--
Open Visual Studio from the start menu and click File=>New=>Project:

* In the New Project dialogue, Installed=>Visual C# from the top Menu 
    - Select `Console App (.NET Core)`
    - Type `CouchbaseExample` in the `Name` textbox
    - Leave the `Location` textbox to its default
    - Leave the `Solution Name` to its default
    - Click `Ok` - a solution and project will be created
* Add the NuGet dependency on `CouchbaseNetClient` to the project:
    - Right Click on the `CouchbaseExample` project in the `Solution Explorer` pane of Visual Studio
    - In the Context Menu select `Manage NuGet Packages…`
    - Click `Browse` in the NuGet Package Manager
    - Type `CouchbaseNetClient` into the search text box making sure `Include Pre-Release` checkbox is selected if you wish to see pre-GA releases
    - Select the version to install from the dropdown and click `Install`
--
MacOS::
+
--
Open Visual Studio and click File=>New=>Solution:

* In the New Project dialogue, Web and Console=>App from the Menu on the Left:
    - Select `Console Application and C#` from the small dropdown (already selected by default)
    - Leave the `Target Framework` to its default
    - Type `CouchbaseExample` in the `Project Name` textbox
    - Leave the `Solution Name` to its default
    - Leave the `Location` textbox to its default
    - Click `Ok` - a solution and project will be created
* Add the NuGet dependency on `CouchbaseNetClient` to the project:
    - Right Click on the `CouchbaseExample` project in the `Solution Explorer` pane of Visual Studio
    - In the Context Menu select `Manage NuGet Packages…`
    - Select `Browse` in the NuGet Package Manager
    - Type `CouchbaseNetClient` into the search text box making sure `Include Pre-Release` checkbox is selected if you wish to see pre-GA releases
    - Select the version to install from the dropdown and click `Add Package`
--
====

=== Using VSCode

If you are using VSCode it is often easier to use both the editor and the Command Line Interface (CLI):

* Open a terminal and make a directory for your project: `mkdir CouchbaseExample`

* Go into the directory: `cd CouchbaseExample`

* Create the console project: `dotnet new console`

* Install the CouchbaseNetClient package: `dotnet add package CouchbaseNetClient`           

* Run the application: `dotnet run`

You should see a `Hello World` message printed in your terminal, which means the application has run successfully. 

Now you can launch VSCode and open the `CouchbaseExample` directory to start editing the `Program.cs` file.

More details can be found here: https://dotnet.microsoft.com/learn/dotnet/hello-world-tutorial/intro.

That's it! You are now ready to xref:start-using-sdk.adoc[start developing your Couchbase application].
